Add secondary navigation (#184)
x-govuk/govuk-prototype-components: docs/secondary-navigation.md

---
layout: sub-navigation
order: 5
title: Secondary navigation
description: Allow users to navigate between pages scoped to a particular section.
---

{% from "example/macro.njk" import appExample %}

{{ appExample({
  component: "secondary-navigation"
}) }}

## When to use this component

Use the secondary navigation when you already have a [primary navigation](primary-navigation) and need to let users navigate between pages that are scoped to a particular section or concept.

For example, if your service is a case management system, you might use the secondary navigation if there are multiple pages associated with a single case.

{{ appExample({
  component: "secondary-navigation",
  example: "with-header"

> }) }}

Author: @paulrobertlloyd  I added this second example as I thought for this component it was helpful to see the component within a bit more context (ie with a heading above and below it) to help distinguish it from the primary nav.  But that seemed too much for the preview at the very top of the page...

Reviewer: Makes sense to me.

## When not to use this component

Do not use this component for the primary sections of your service, or if a [sub-navigation](sub-navigation) would be more appropriate.

> You could also consider using the [tabs component](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/components/tabs/) if the amount of content in each sub-section is small.

Reviewer: Do we want to add something about how tabs should be used client-side, and secondary navigation should be used server-side, if that makes sense?

Maybe unnecessary as this is the default behaviour, but I’ve seen cases in the past where the tab component has been ‘hijacked’ to link to different pages, whereas this component should be used in that instance instead.

Author: I'm not sure we need to use the words client-side or server-side, but maybe we could go into a bit more detail about the difference between navigation and tabs, and when to use (and not use) either one?

The Tabs page goes into a fair bit of detail, including this:

> Do not use the tabs component if the total amount of content the tabs contain will make the page slow to load. For this reason, do not use the tabs component as a form of page navigation.

But yeah, I’ve also seen this ignored and the Tabs styled re-used as navigation instead (which is probably good evidence for the need for secondary navigation?).

Reviewer: Wasn’t suggesting actually saying client-side/sever-side 😉 Perhaps something we can ignore until we see a need to add additional guidance?

Author: Update the guidance - take another look and let me know what you think. I added a "How it works" section, following the convention from the GOV.UK Design System website.

## When not to use this component

Do not use this component for the primary sections of your service, or if a [sub-navigation](sub-navigation) would be more appropriate.

You could also consider using the [tabs component](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/components/tabs/) if the amount of content in each sub-section is small.

## How it works

{{ appExample({
  component: "secondary-navigation",
  example: "with-header"
}) }}

Unlike [tabs](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/components/tabs/), secondary navigation does not use JavaScript. Each item within the navigation is a link to a separate full page.

One of the items should always be highlighted as the current page. This item remains a link, but uses black text and has a line beneath it.

The secondary navigation should appear before the `<main>` element of the page. This means that it is skipped when [skip link](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/components/skip-link/) is used.

The title of the current page can be repeated below the sub navigation, inside the `<main>` element, using a heading tag.

You can use HTML or, if you are using Nunjucks or the GOV.UK Prototype Kit, you can use the Nunjucks macro.

> ### Nunjucks macro options

Reviewer: Tempted to update documentation for the other components to use this heading. Can do so in a separate PR. 

```suggestion
### Nunjucks macro options
```

Author: Yeah, I thought it was worth following the term used on the GOV.UK Design System website (although there it's hidden away behind a Details, which I often forget about).

For example, if your service is a case management system, you might use the secondary navigation if there are multiple pages associated with a single case.

## When not to use this component

Do not use this component for the primary sections of your service, or if a [sub-navigation](sub-navigation) would be more appropriate.

You could also consider using the [tabs component](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/components/tabs/) if the amount of content in each sub-section is small.

## How it works

{{ appExample({
  example: "secondary-navigation-with-header"
}) }}

Unlike [tabs](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/components/tabs/), secondary navigation does not use JavaScript. Each item within the navigation is a link to a separate full page.

One of the items should always be highlighted as the current page. This item remains a link, but uses black text and has a line beneath it.

The secondary navigation should appear before the `<main>` element of the page. This means that it is skipped when [skip link](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/components/skip-link/) is used.

> The scope of the secondary navigation can be given by a heading above it. When doing this, you should set `labelledBy` to be the id of the heading, so that it is associated with the heading for screen reader users.

Reviewer: Avoid using description of visual placement (could be below, to one side…)

```suggestion
The scope of the secondary navigation can be given by an associated heading. When doing this, you should set `labelledBy` to be the `id` of the heading, so that it is associated with the heading for screen reader users.
```

The title of the current page can be repeated below the sub navigation, inside the `<main>` element, using a heading tag.

You can use HTML or, if you are using Nunjucks or the GOV.UK Prototype Kit, you can use the Nunjucks macro.

### Nunjucks macro options

| Name                    | Type   | Description                                                                                                                  |
| :---------------------- | :----- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **items**               | array  | **Required**. An array of navigation links within the secondary navigation. See [items](#options-for-items).                 |

> | **labelledBy**          | string | A reference to the id of an existing heading on a page which actuals as the label for the navigation                         |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **labelledBy**          | string | A reference to the id of an existing heading on a page which acts as the label for the navigation.                         |
```

> | **visuallyHiddenTitle** | text   | A visually-hidden label to describe the navigation. Defaults to ‘Secondary Menu’. Not included if labelledBy is set instead. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **visuallyHiddenTitle** | text   | A visually-hidden label to describe the navigation. Defaults to ‘Secondary Menu’. Not included if `labelledBy` is set instead. |
```

| **classes**             | string | Classes to add to the primary navigation container.                                                                          |
| **attributes**          | object | HTML attributes (for example data attributes) to add to the primary navigation container.                                    |

#### Options for items

| Name        | Type    | Description                                                        |
| :---------- | :------ | :----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **text**    | string  | **Required**. Text of the navigation link.                         |
| **href**    | array   | **Required**. The value of the navigation link’s `href` attribute. |
| **current** | boolean | Indicate that the item is the current page.                        |
| **classes** | string  | Classes to add to the navigation item.                             |

## Research on this component

> This component is based on ones originally developed as part of the MOJ and HMCTS design systems.

Reviewer: Avoid abbreviations where possible:

```suggestion
This component is based on ones originally developed as part of the Ministry of Justice and HMCTS design systems.
```
